Data communication, including data transmission and data reception, is the transfer of data, transmitted and received over a point-to-point or point-to-multipoint communication channel. Examples of such channels are copper wires, optical fibers, wireless communication using radio spectrum, storage media and computer buses. The data are represented as an electromagnetic signal, such as an electrical voltage, radiowave, microwave, or infrared signal.

Analog transmission is a method of conveying voice, data, image, signal or video information using a continuous signal which varies in amplitude, phase, or some other property in proportion to that of a variable. The messages are either represented by a sequence of pulses by means of a line code (baseband transmission), or by a limited set of continuously varying waveforms (passband transmission), using a digital modulation method. The passband modulation and corresponding demodulation is carried out by modem equipment.

Digital communications, including digital transmission and digital reception, is the transfer of either a digitized analog signal or a born-digital bitstream.[1] According to the most common definition, both baseband and passband bit-stream components are considered part of a digital signal; an alternative definition considers only the baseband signal as digital, and passband transmission of digital data as a form of digital-to-analog conversion.

Distinction between related subjects
Courses and textbooks in the field of data transmission[1] as well as digital transmission[2][3] and digital communications[4][5] have similar content.

Digital transmission or data transmission traditionally belongs to telecommunications and electrical engineering. Basic principles of data transmission may also be covered within the computer science or computer engineering topic of data communications, which also includes computer networking applications and communication protocols, for example routing, switching and inter-process communication. Although the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) involves transmission, TCP and other transport layer protocols are covered in computer networking but not discussed in a textbook or course about data transmission.

In most textbooks, the term analog transmission only refers to the transmission of an analog message signal (without digitization) by means of an analog signal, either as a non-modulated baseband signal or as a passband signal using an analog modulation method such as AM or FM. It may also include analog-over-analog pulse modulated baseband signals such as pulse-width modulation. In a few books within the computer networking tradition, analog transmission also refers to passband transmission of bit-streams using digital modulation methods such as FSK, PSK and ASK. Note that these methods are covered in textbooks named digital transmission or data transmission, for example.[1]

The theoretical aspects of data transmission are covered by information theory and coding theory.

Protocol layers and sub-topics
OSI model
by layer
7.  Application layer
6.  Presentation layer
5.  Session layer
4.  Transport layer
3.  Network layer
2.  Data link layer
1.  Physical layer
vte
Courses and textbooks in the field of data transmission typically deal with the following OSI model protocol layers and topics:

Layer 1, the physical layer:
Channel coding including
Digital modulation schemes
Line coding schemes
Forward error correction (FEC) codes
Bit synchronization
Multiplexing
Equalization
Channel models
Layer 2, the data link layer:
Channel access schemes, media access control (MAC)
Packet mode communication and Frame synchronization
Error detection and automatic repeat request (ARQ)
Flow control
Layer 6, the presentation layer:
Source coding (digitization and data compression), and information theory.
Cryptography (may occur at any layer)
It is also common to deal with the cross-layer design of those three layers.[7]